Write modes standardization and examples (#817)
SimpleDataLabsInc/prophecy-docs: docs/analysts/development/gems/source-target/table/write-options.md

---
title: Write Options
id: write-options
slug: /table-write-options
description: Determine how to store processed data and handle changes over time
tags: []
---

When writing data to a table, there are multiple ways to determine how the data will be written. When you configure a target table or target model, the **Write Options** tab lets you determine how you will store your processed data and handle changes to the data over time. The choice of write mode depends on your specific use case.

## Write modes

### Wipe and Replace Table (default)

Replaces all existing data with new data on each run. This is the simplest approach and ensures your target table always reflects the latest state of your source data.

:::info
The incoming table must have the same schema as the existing table.
:::

> #### Partition the target table (BigQuery only)

Author: Agreed

> A partitioned table is a database table that has been divided into smaller, more manageable pieces called partitions. Use [partitioned tables](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/partitioned-tables) to improve query performance and cost. In Prophecy, you can partition your target table using the **Partition by** option.

Author: It's complicated.

There are two types of partitioning here. 

1. Wipe and Replace Partitions. In this case, Prophecy "partitions" the data to recognize which sections of the data to wipe and replace. It basically just recognizes different **groups** in the data.
2. Partition a table during wipe and replace table. "Partitioned tables" are exclusive to BigQuery where you can actually _store the data in separate partitions_. 

> "In a partitioned table, data is stored in physical blocks, each of which holds one partition of data"
> https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/partitioned-tables

This helps since [dbt provides a way to use this to its advantage while writing data ](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/bigquery-configs#using-table-partitioning-and-clustering)

Knowing this, how much do you think we need to include in our documentation? We're trying to abstract from dbt as much as possible, but maybe it's necessary here to include

| (Advanced) On Schema Change                        | Specifies how schema changes should be handled during the merge process.<ul><li><strong>ignore</strong>: Newly added columns will not be written to the model. This is the default option.</li><li><strong>fail</strong>: Triggers an error message when the source and target schemas diverge.</li><li><strong>append_new_columns</strong>: Append new columns to the existing table.</li><li><strong>sync_all_columns</strong>: Adds any new columns to the existing table, and removes any columns that are now missing. Includes data type changes. This option uses the output of the previous gem.</li></ul> |

</div>

#### Example: Update vehicle type only

> Vehicle type information is updated while registration dates remain unchanged.

Author: Trying to keep the examples short but a few more rows would be fine

| (Advanced) On Schema Change                        | Specifies how schema changes should be handled during the merge process.<ul><li><strong>ignore</strong>: Newly added columns will not be written to the model. This is the default option.</li><li><strong>fail</strong>: Triggers an error message when the source and target schemas diverge.</li><li><strong>append_new_columns</strong>: Append new columns to the existing table.</li><li><strong>sync_all_columns</strong>: Adds any new columns to the existing table, and removes any columns that are now missing. Includes data type changes. This option uses the output of the previous gem.</li></ul> |

</div>

> #### Example: Update trips in the last 30 days

Author: True!

Only trips within the last 30 days are updated, leaving older ones unchanged.

<div class="table-example">

**Incoming table**

| TRIP_ID | STATUS |
| ------- | ------ |
| 201     | Closed |

**Existing table**

| TRIP_ID | VEHICLE_ID | DATE       | STATUS |
| ------- | ---------- | ---------- | ------ |
| 201     | 101        | 2024-01-05 | Open   |
| 202     | 102        | 2023-12-20 | Open   |

**Updated table**

| TRIP_ID | VEHICLE_ID | DATE       | STATUS |
| ------- | ---------- | ---------- | ------ |
| 201     | 101        | 2024-01-05 | Closed |
| 202     | 102        | 2023-12-20 | Open   |

</div>

---

### Merge - Delete and Insert

> Deletes existing rows that match the unique key from the target table, then reinserts the corresponding rows and inserts new rows from the incoming dataset. This ensures that updated records are fully replaced instead of partially updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For rows in the target table that have keys that match rows in the incoming dataset, deletes matching rows in the target and replaces them. For incoming rows with new keys, inserts these normally. This ensures that updated records are fully replaced instead of partially updated.
```
